Let's move on to the observer pattern.
It somehow always scrolls down to
my StackBlitz whenever I open it.
So with the observer pattern, if you've
used React or just JavaScript in general,
you may be familiar with
something called observables.
With the observer pattern, well,
there are multiple parts at play here.
So we have the observable object,
which can be observed by subscribers.
And an observable object can in
turn notify all those subscribers
when an event occurs.
So in this example,
we have an observable there.
It has a notify method,
a subscribe method, and
an unsubscribe method, just visualized,
not in the code there.
So what we can do is we can
subscribe certain functions,
or any logic really, to that observable.
And then when the notify method is invoked
on this observable, all the subscribers
that are currently subscribed to that
observable get notified with that data.
So for example, if we then notify
subscribers on that observable, and
we have four functions here that
are all subscribers to this observable.
I'm just going make this big real quick.
Whenever we notify it with certain data,
so
here the data is a string
notify subscribers.
All of these subscribers will get notified
with that string, notify subscribers.
And what they do with it, that's up
to them, the observable doesn't care.
But they get passed that
as their argument as data.
So maybe we want to add
some analytics here.
Maybe we want to notify an observable
whenever a user clicked on something.
We'll actually do this in
the challenge later on.
But it's a very useful way to notify
a lot of different parts of your
application without having to repeat
that code throughout the application.
It's not like, we have to send
the request within every function.
We can just all manage that
within one observable, and
they can then notify all the subscribers.
It probably gets more clear in
the challenge that we have later on.
But yeah, so an observer object, we can
just have a singleton like we had before.
And the easiest implementation
is to have a notify method
like we saw before, which gets some data.
The data can just come from
throughout the application.
And then all the observers
that are currently subscribed
to this observable,
we invoke that observer with the data.
We don't know what these observers are.
We don't know what they do.
The observable doesn't care.
We just care about passing the data to
all the observers that are currently
subscribed.
Then, of course,
we have the subscribe method,
which is just pushing that
function to the observers array.
So all the observers that
care about this observable,
I know I use these methods like observer,
observable.
And then also we have unsubscribe
to remove that function again
from the observers list.
So the easiest way, or
a very simple example here,
I guess, is say we have an observable and
we have a button,
so an element ID button,
and we just wanna click it.
We can just notify
the observable with clicked, and
say that we have a lot of subscribers,
maybe Analytics subscribers,
Google Analytics subscribers,
email subscribers.
I don't know what all these functions do.
They can be declared
elsewhere in our code.
They would all get
notified with this string.
And maybe they can also send events
asynchronously based on that user event.
So that's something that
an observable can do.
For example here,
let me see if I can split the screen here.
We have this observer which is the exact
same implementation that we had before.
So we have notify,
subscribe, and unsubscribe.
Then we also just have
a fake analytics page.
So we have sendToGoogleAnalytics,
sendToCustomAnalytics, and sendToEmail.
And then here, I'm subscribing them.
So now,
whenever I invoke that subscribe method,
these functions get pushed
to the observer array.
Wait, I thought this was the observer,
to this observers array.
So then when you see when we notify,
I think it might forget,
this invokes that method.
So it would in turn [LAUGH]
see all this method.
It would then pass this
data here as this data.
So now we see if we run, so in index.js,
I just have this simple notify function.
And then that also have a notify just
after a second just to kind of simulate
maybe user events, I don't know.
So when we run this, You can see that it
automatically notified all the subscribers
because we imported the analytics here.
So it ran this file,
it executed all these contents.
So it created the functions, and
then also subscribe it to the observer.
We then notified it here back
in index.js with this string,
which then sent the string from the
observable, sorry, to all the observers.
So it invokes these
functions with this data.
Yeah, so just look at the tradeoffs for
the observer.
Yeah, so the observer object, like I
said before, the function in this case,
are not tightly coupled
to the observable object.
So the observable doesn't care
about what the observers do.
All it cares about is, okay,
I'm going to pass this data to them.
I don't care what they do with it.
Here's your data.
So it can just be decoupled at any time.
So maybe our application grows or
it changes its need.
Maybe we don't wanna
have analytics anymore.
We just easily unsubscribe.
Yeah, so here, an example like
the observable object is responsible for
monitoring the events.
And the observers simply handle the
received data in whatever way possible.
Now, of course, make sure that if you're
notifying all the subscribers, for
example, and I know this is a micro
optimization, but we like this for
each method.
If you have millions of observers,
this might take a while.
So just make sure that you're
doing that in a performant way.
Maybe if it's asynchronous
with Promise.all or
something that it can run in parallel.
Cuz in most cases, the observers,
they don't rely on each other.
They don't necessarily
have to run sequentially.
They're all just kinda
standalone on their own.
Okay, so I have a simple exercise
here with the observer pattern.
So we have two buttons.
So I have I'm a pink button and
I'm a blue button.
Now you can see that I've added
an event listener here with a click.
And it has some data, and it sends all
these data to the Google Analytics,
custom analytics, and send to email.
Same with the blue button, but, of course,
the blue button sends different data.
Now your exercise here is to change
this so we aren't repeating ourselves.
We are not explicitly invoking
this function with the data.
Instead, we will notify an observer
that this click happened.
And this observer will then notify
this sendToGoogleAnalytics,
sendToCustomAnalytics, and sendToEmail.
To achieve a similar result, we still
want to log this data or we still wanna
send it to Google Analytics,
custom analytics whenever the user clicks.
Just not in this way because
we're repeating ourselves here.
It's not very scalable, so
we wanna use an observer instead.
>> So instead of repeating the functions,
we notify the observer and
the observer will take care
of all those broadcasting.
>> Yes, so if you just need a sneak peek,
it's pretty similar to what we did,
or maybe not.
Yeah, I guess it's pretty similar to
what we did here with the analytics,
and then subscribing them.
>> It kinda reminds me of event.
>> Yeah.
>> Cuz if you click a button,
anything that's subscribed to
the click listener will run.
>> That's using the observer
pattern as well.
It is really just a pattern.
It's more like a way that you think about
architecting your code about how the data
is passed to certain parts of your code.
So I would say that the events is
also using that observer pattern.
Maybe not like one-on-one, and it doesn't
have to be, but yeah, it's very similar.
>> Is the observer pattern and
Pub/Sub pattern the same?
>> I believe so,
I haven't used a Pub/Sub pattern in ages.
So I don't know if it has other
functionality that maybe makes it easier
cuz the observer pattern is,
of course, a very low level.
This is just a way to think about things.
But I would say they're the same for
what I know.
Yeah, cuz it's like publish-subscribe,
yeah.